Add DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets blog post (#45640)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-04-15-devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets.md

---
layout: blog
title: "DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets"
slug: devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets
date: 2024-04-15
---

> **Author**: Evgenii Frikin

Reviewer: If you rebase against _main_ you can (and should) use the `author` field in front matter. See other blog articles from 2024.

Author: Thank you for your suggest!

Fixed.

The Secret is one of the basic resources that exists in the Kubernetes API. This
kind of resource is used for different purposes and despite the name Secret,
sensitive data is insecure to store in it. Recently considerable attention has
been paid to

> [security improvement](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/)

Reviewer: Thanks, but: the original text is correct.

> [security improvement](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/)

Reviewer 2: Okay, thank you.

for kind of Secret resource, but Kubernetes still doesn't include appropriate
out-of-the-box because Kubernetes philosophy carries simplicity in order not to
compromise it engineers have to make sure Kubernetes Secret are saved

According to

> [Good practices for Kubernetes Secrets](/docs/concepts/security/secrets-good-practices/)

Reviewer: Thanks, but: the original text is correct.

> [Good practices for Kubernetes Secrets](/docs/concepts/security/secrets-good-practices/)

Reviewer 2: Okay, thank you.

there are several options on how to improve security of this kind of Secret:
encrypt secrets in the etcd, restrict the access to them via RBAC, configure

> access to external Secret, etc. However this partially solves the security issue

Author: Thank you for your suggest

Fixed.

> because they are cluster side solutions and they help to improve security of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
because they are cluster-side solutions and they help to improve security of the
```
The hyphen makes the reader know that these are not separate words.

Author: Thank you for your suggest

Fixed.

cluster overall.

> In the modern world unilateral solutions aren't effective enough and can hide

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the modern world, unilateral solutions aren't effective enough and can hide
```
I added a comma to highlight a pause.

security issues known as
[Security through obscurity](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_through_obscurity).

> In order to avoid it it's necessary to integrate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid it, it's necessary to integrate
```
- I made the sentence concise.
- I added a comma to highlight a pause.

[DevSecOps methodology](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/devops/what-is-devsecops)
which implies integrated security as a shared responsibility throughout the
entire IT lifecycle. In other words, security solutions must start with the
development process and apply to all other levels correspondingly.

According to

> [OWASP Secrets Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#5-containers-orchestrators)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[OWASP Secrets Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#5-containers-orchestrators),
```
I added a comma to highlight a pause.

it's recommended to use Injection of Secret via file and in-memory. Provision of
sensitive data via environment variables isn't recommended, but at the same time
it's recommended in The
[Twelve Factors](https://12factor.net/config).
These are general recommendations which don't impact security issues that's why

> their application should make sense,but passing config via environment variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
their application should make sense, but passing config via environment variables
```
I added proper spacing.

with sensitive data must be kept to a minimum.

Injection of Secret via file and in-memory has pros and cons and I would like to
show which security issues exist when using Injection of Secret via file and
suggest solutions. In fact, there will be a general solution and specific
implementation will be different in terms of specific management and delivery
secrets tools. To keep the examples simple I will use `spec.initContainers` to
simulate an injection agent for delivering secrets to Pod.

## Baseline

> Imagine there is a simple application which processes http requests. On request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imagine there is an application which processes http requests. On request
```
Avoided a word that [assumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-words-that-assume-a-specific-level-of-understanding) a specific level of understanding.

Reviewer: The original text is actually find @efrikin - you're describing an application that is not complex.

Reviewer 2: I appreciate your feedbacks, @sftim.

delivery to Pod will be done via `spec.initContainers` then
`spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean the file after successful passing
of readiness probe in order to make file with sensitive data to Pod useless for
attacker.

*[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/fba0bf048d1cd915fb265fc1b89041582a1d76f9/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L23-L61)*
```yaml
...
  initContainers:
    - name: secret-injector
      image: alpine:3.19
      command:
        - sh
        - -c
        - cat /dev/urandom | base64 -w 0 | fold -w 16 | head -1 > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
      envFrom:
         -  secretRef:
             name: demo-secret
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /secrets
          name: demo-secret
...
    lifecycle:
      postStart:
        exec:
          command:
          - sh
          - -c
          - wget -qO- localhost:8080/readiness && echo > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
```

The container must change status to `READY` after the application reads a file
with secret, otherwise `spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean it.

## Stage-03: Smooth update

> So at the current moment the application can be configured via the environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So at the current moment, the application can be configured via the environment
```
I added a comma to highlight a pause.

		}
	case "/readiness":
		if isExistEnv && isExistFile {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "OK")
		} else if isExistEnv && isExistFile == false && strings.HasPrefix(envVal, filePrefix) {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable was defined but file not found")
		} else if isExistEnv {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable was defined")
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable wasn't defined")
		}
	default:
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
		fmt.Fprintln(w, "404 Not Found")
	}
}
```
In fact everything works and you can stop here. Unfortunately in the real world
there are a lot of already working services and they must have implementation of
additional environment variables. This isn't always possible and this approach
can have specific limitations. In order to reduce the amount of limitations it's
necessary to implement an approach based on support of both
functions (variables) but without additional environment variables.
This approach allows not to implement additional variable but to use the current
variable for two cases:

> * legacy: using env variable for storing sensitive data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Legacy: Using env variable for storing sensitive data.
```

Reviewer: Thanks, but: the original text is correct.

> * new: using env variable for storing path to file with sensitive data and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2 New: using env variable for storing path to file with sensitive data and
```

Reviewer: Thanks, but: the original text is correct.

override current value to value from the file

> In order to distinguish sensitive data values from path to file, by using prefix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To distinguish sensitive data values from path to file, by using prefixes,
```

> This will allow us to use the same variable and follow OWASP recommendations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this will allow us to use the same variable and follow OWASP recommendations.
```

Reviewer 2: Okay, thank you.

Author: Thank you for your suggest

Fixed.

		if err == nil {
			return path, !info.IsDir()
		}
		if errors.Is(err, os.ErrNotExist) {
			return "", false
		}
	}
	return "", false
}
```

Magic happens in the `httpHandle` function. Environment variable value is passed
into function, if it's a file it will be read and current environment variable
value will be overridden by a new value that was read from the file.

*[cmd/main.go](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/8c8177b4955ce9cd9686c2746e5e2a810b9c2f62/cmd/main.go#L45-L59)*
```go
func httpHandle(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	if !changed {
		if envVal, isExistEnv = os.LookupEnv(envVar); isExistEnv {
			if filePath, isExistFile = fileExist(envVal); isExistFile {
				body, err := os.ReadFile(filePath)
				if err != nil {
					log.Fatalf("unable to read file: %v", err)
				}
				os.Setenv(envVar, string(body))
				envVal = os.Getenv(envVar)
				changed = true
			}
		}
	}
}
```

Finally, if define `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=file:///secrets/secret.file`, deploy
application and make request to `root` location, response will contain file
content which is defined in the environment variable:

```bash
curl -v localhost:8080

> ...

Reviewer: Ideally, [separate commands from output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output).

Author: Thank you for your suggest

Fixed.

> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:8080
> User-Agent: curl/8.5.0
> Accept: */*
>
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...
PVHBD5I21osTOX9i
```

Let's check process environment:

```bash
# strings /proc/1/environ
...
DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=file:///secrets/secret.file

> ...

Reviewer: Ideally, [separate commands from output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output).

(gdb) print main.envVal
$1 = 0xc00001e0d4 "file://secret.file"
```

Next, `os.ReadFile` read file, `os.Setenv` makes override value of the
environment variable, but `os.Getenv` gets new value from recently-rewritten
environment variable:

```bash
(gdb) next
50                                      body, err := os.ReadFile(filePath)
...
54                                      os.Setenv(envVar, string(body))
(gdb) next
55                                      envVal = os.Getenv(envVar)
```

In conclusion, let's make sure, that the same variable has different values:

```bash
(gdb) next
56                                      changed = true
(gdb) print main.envVal
$2 = 0xc0000ea014 "MySecret\n"
(gdb) show environment DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD
DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD = file://secret.file
```

As you can see debug process requires a few conditions such as: disabled
compiler optimization, access to source code and debug tool existence, but if
application runs into container and is managed by orchestrator such as:
Kubernetes, then it generates additional problems which have to be solved in
order to use debug tool.

> For more details please see [Debugging Go Code with GDB](https://go.dev/doc/gdb)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details please see [Debugging Go Code with GDB](https://go.dev/doc/gdb).
```

Author: Thank you for your suggest

Fixed.

---
layout: blog
title: "DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets"
slug: devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets
date: 2024-04-15

> evergreen: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We wouldn't expect to maintain this article.

---

**Author**: Evgenii Frikin

The Secret is one of the basic resources that exists in the Kubernetes API. This
kind of resource is used for different purposes and despite the name Secret,
sensitive data is insecure to store in it. Recently considerable attention has
been paid to

> [security improvement](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/#)

Reviewer 3: We use site-relative links where feasible.

```suggestion
[security improvement](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/)
```

for kind of Secret resource, but Kubernetes still doesn't include appropriate
out-of-the-box because Kubernetes philosophy carries simplicity in order not to
compromise it engineers have to make sure Kubernetes Secret are saved

According to

> [Good practices for Kubernetes Secrets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/secrets-good-practices/)

Reviewer 3: Site-relative link in this line as well.

```suggestion
[Good practices for Kubernetes Secrets](/docs/concepts/security/secrets-good-practices/)
```

---
layout: blog
title: "DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets"
slug: devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets

> date: 2024-04-15

Reviewer: How about we bump this to the 9th of May? (change it here and in the filename)

Author: > How about we bump this to the 9th of May? (change it here and in the filename)

Works perfectly for me!

			fmt.Fprintln(w, "OK")
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable wasn't defined")
		}
	default:
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
		fmt.Fprintln(w, "404 Not Found")
	}
}
```

## Stage-01: Reject environment vars for storing sensitive data

According to OWASP recommendation, it's necessary to use file instead of env.
That's why it's necessary to make changes to implementation readiness probes
and deployment manifests.

*[cmd/main.go](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/96afd59f8a391973a8ed5a9b410915b9e99d4bf4/cmd/main.go#L11-L67)*
```go
const (
	envVar = "DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE"
)

...

func fileExist(path string) bool {
	info, err := os.Stat(path)
	if err == nil {
		return !info.IsDir()
	}
	if errors.Is(err, os.ErrNotExist) {
		return false
	}
	return false
}

func httpHandle(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

...

	if envVal, ok = os.LookupEnv(envVar); ok {
		if fileExist(envVal) {
			isExist = true
		}
	}
}
```

Now applications check `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` was defined then application
checks whether the file exists by value from the environment variable.

> *[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/96afd59f8a391973a8ed5a9b410915b9e99d4bf4/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L25-L45)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml`](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/96afd59f8a391973a8ed5a9b410915b9e99d4bf4/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L25-L45)
```
?

Author: Fixed

mounts the Secret as a volume to the Pod.

Excellent! Part of recommendations have been completed, but for the full picture
it's necessary to solve the following issues:

* The secret file is mounted as a volume and it's necessary to remove after it usage
(e.g reading)
* Kind Secret is insecure that's why it's necessary to minimize its use
* Additional implementation of environment variable such as:
`DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` can Impede applications update.

## Stage-02: Injection of secret to Pod instead of mountpoint

In order to get rid of Secret as mountpoint it's necessary to use Injection of
Secret via file to Pod. Often secret manager tools perform these functions.
Also they provide functions such as: dynamic secrets, database credential
rotation, automated PKI infrastructure, data encryption and tokenization,
identity-based access, key management, etc.

In the example below, simulation of getting secret from secure storage and
delivery to Pod will be done via `spec.initContainers` then
`spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean the file after successful passing
of readiness probe in order to make file with sensitive data to Pod useless for
attacker.

> *[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/fba0bf048d1cd915fb265fc1b89041582a1d76f9/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L23-L61)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml`](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/fba0bf048d1cd915fb265fc1b89041582a1d76f9/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L23-L61)
```

Author: Fixed

---
layout: blog
title: "DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets"
slug: devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets
date: 2024-04-15
author: >
  Evgenii Frikin
---

The Secret is one of the basic resources that exists in the Kubernetes API. This
kind of resource is used for different purposes and despite the name Secret,
sensitive data is insecure to store in it. Recently considerable attention has
been paid to
[security improvement](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/)
for kind of Secret resource, but Kubernetes still doesn't include appropriate
out-of-the-box because Kubernetes philosophy carries simplicity in order not to

> compromise it engineers have to make sure Kubernetes Secret are saved

Author: I describe the current situation related to storing Secret and usage of it in the practice. 
I would like to emphasize that out-of-the-box I can encrypt Secrets to database but it won't impact  security Pod anyhow.

encrypt secrets in the etcd, restrict the access to them via RBAC, configure
access to external Secret, etc. However, this partially solves the security issue
because they are cluster-side solutions and they help to improve security of the
cluster overall.

In the modern world, unilateral solutions aren't effective enough and can hide
security issues known as
[Security through obscurity](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_through_obscurity).
To avoid it, it's necessary to integrate
[DevSecOps methodology](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/devops/what-is-devsecops)
which implies integrated security as a shared responsibility throughout the
entire IT lifecycle. In other words, security solutions must start with the
development process and apply to all other levels correspondingly.

According to
[OWASP Secrets Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#5-containers-orchestrators),
it's recommended to use Injection of Secret via file and in-memory. Provision of
sensitive data via environment variables isn't recommended, but at the same time
it's recommended in The

> [Twelve Factors](https://12factor.net/config).

Author: Right. 12factor describes storing configuration as environment variables but it doesn't mention that storing sensitive data as environment variables is very dangerous. That's why I emphasize it here.

> [Twelve Factors](https://12factor.net/config).

Reviewer 4: I don't think that you need to mention 12factor here. You can just say that storing sensitive data in environment variables is a bad idea because <reason>

These are general recommendations which don't impact security issues that's why
their application should make sense, but passing config via environment variables
with sensitive data must be kept to a minimum.

Injection of Secret via file and in-memory has pros and cons and I would like to
show which security issues exist when using Injection of Secret via file and
suggest solutions. In fact, there will be a general solution and specific
implementation will be different in terms of specific management and delivery
secrets tools. To keep the examples simple I will use `spec.initContainers` to

> simulate an injection agent for delivering secrets to Pod.

Author: This is  

> I feel like the point of the blog post (demonstrating a DevSecOps approach to securing the injection of Secrets as files) is buried here and should be stated right at the top of the page like "This post demonstrates a DevSecOps approach to..."

Actually it is one of the interpretations of OWASP recommendation without a secret manager. I don't want it to be used as-is.

## Baseline

Imagine there is a simple application which processes http requests. On request
to `root` location client receives environment variable value
`DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD`. On request `/readiness` receives status
application (ready or not ready) and if the environment variable isn't defined

> Pod doesn't change status to `READY`.

Author: > TBH I don't really understand what this application is supposed to do

The simple app that processes HTTP request and return value of `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD` environment variable with sensitive data

*[cmd/main.go](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/14624762f1546e2bfd43e65cee26186c514fa351/cmd/main.go#L10-L53)*
```go
const (
	envVar = "DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD"
)

...

func httpHandle(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

	var isExist, ok bool
	var envVal string

	if envVal, ok = os.LookupEnv(envVar); ok {
		isExist = true
	}

	switch r.URL.Path {
	case "/":
		if isExist {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, envVal)
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Secret Not Found")
		}
	case "/readiness":
		if isExist {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "OK")
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable wasn't defined")
		}
	default:
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
		fmt.Fprintln(w, "404 Not Found")
	}
}
```

Environment variable is defined via `spec.containers.0.envFrom.secretRef.name`

> in Pod resource.

Author: Fixed

*[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/14624762f1546e2bfd43e65cee26186c514fa351/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L25-L28)*
```yaml
  envFrom:
    - secretRef:
        name: demo-secret

> ```

Author: > Or omit it entirely since you already said what field is used

Fixed!

## Stage-01: Reject environment vars for storing sensitive data

According to OWASP recommendation, it's necessary to use file instead of env.
That's why it's necessary to make changes to implementation readiness probes

> and deployment manifests.

Author: I don't think that it's necessary because a reader read the article step by step together with code. The code of example and link to repo give understanding about next steps.

*[cmd/main.go](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/96afd59f8a391973a8ed5a9b410915b9e99d4bf4/cmd/main.go#L11-L67)*
```go
const (
	envVar = "DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE"
)

...

func fileExist(path string) bool {
	info, err := os.Stat(path)
	if err == nil {
		return !info.IsDir()
	}
	if errors.Is(err, os.ErrNotExist) {
		return false
	}
	return false
}

func httpHandle(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

...

	if envVal, ok = os.LookupEnv(envVar); ok {
		if fileExist(envVal) {
			isExist = true
		}
	}
}
```

> Now applications check `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` was defined then application

Author: > Remove this sentence and move it higher

At first a reader read about replace environment variable in the code from DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD to DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE

> Now applications check `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` was defined then application

then they read about the variable

checks whether the file exists by value from the environment variable.

*[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/96afd59f8a391973a8ed5a9b410915b9e99d4bf4/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L25-L45)*
```yaml
...
spec:
  containers:
  - envFrom:
    - secretRef:
         name: demo-secret
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /secrets
      name: demo-secret
      readOnly: true
  volumes:
  - name: demo-secret
    secret:
      optional: true
      secretName: demo-secret
...
```

`spec.containers.0.envFrom` defines all of the Secret's data as container
environment variables and `spec.volume/spec.containers.0.volumeMounts`
defines all mountpoints to Pod.

Excellent! Part of recommendations have been completed, but for the full picture
it's necessary to solve the following issues:

* The secret file is a mountpoint and it's necessary to remove after it usage
(e.g reading)
* Kind Secret is insecure that's why it's necessary to minimize its use
* Additional implementation of environment variable such as:

> `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` can Impede applications update.

Author: Implementation of new variable require some changes to code. you can use `*_PASSWORD` variable instead of `*_PASSWORD` and `*_PASSWORD_FILE` variables. This allow to make easy smooth upgrade application from basic env variables with sensitive data to sensitive data from file. 

Please see [link](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/tree/main/viper) for more details.

> ## Stage-02: Injection of secret to Pod instead of mountpoint

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Inject the Secret to the Pod instead of using a volume
```

Author: I use headers name as tags in the repository with examples. That's why I can't change headers.

> In order to get rid of Secret as mountpoint it's necessary to use Injection of
> Secret via file to Pod. Often secret manager tools perform these functions.
> Also they provide functions such as: dynamic secrets, database credential

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To stop mounting the Secret, we inject the Secret into the Pod as a file.
Many third-party secret manager tools perform these functions and have
additional features like dynamic secrets, database credential
```

rotation, automated PKI infrastructure, data encryption and tokenization,
identity-based access, key management, etc.

> In the example below, simulation of getting secret from secure storage and
> delivery to Pod will be done via `spec.initContainers` then
> `spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean the file after successful passing
> of readiness probe in order to make file with sensitive data to Pod useless for
> attacker.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the following example, we use `spec.initContainers` to simulate fetching a
Secret from an external secret store and delivering it to the Pod. After the Pod
readiness probe succeeds, the `spec.containers.0.postStart` hook cleans the
file so that it's useless to an attacker.
```

*[kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/fba0bf048d1cd915fb265fc1b89041582a1d76f9/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml#L23-L61)*
```yaml
...
  initContainers:
    - name: secret-injector
      image: alpine:3.19
      command:
        - sh
        - -c
        - cat /dev/urandom | base64 -w 0 | fold -w 16 | head -1 > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
      envFrom:
         -  secretRef:
             name: demo-secret
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /secrets
          name: demo-secret
...
    lifecycle:
      postStart:
        exec:
          command:
          - sh
          - -c
          - wget -qO- localhost:8080/readiness && echo > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
```

The container must change status to `READY` after the application reads a file

> with secret, otherwise `spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean it.

Reviewer 4: Will clean it or won't clean it? If I understand correctly, Pod reads the Secret file, starts up correctly, then the postStart hook kicks in. Is that right?

Author: > Will clean it or won't clean it? If I understand correctly, Pod reads the Secret file, starts up correctly, then the postStart hook kicks in. Is that right?

Right. If file was injected to Pod.

## Stage-03: Smooth update

> So at the current moment, the application can be configured via the environment
> variable `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` containing a path to a secret file and if
> the file exists (checking via `/readianess` probe) then read it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After some modifications, the application can now be configured with the environment
variable `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` containing a path to a secret file. The
`/readiness` probe checks whether the file exists and then reads it.
```

			if filePath, isExistFile = fileExist(envVal); isExistFile {
				body, err := os.ReadFile(filePath)
				if err != nil {
					log.Fatalf("unable to read file: %v", err)
				}
				os.Setenv(envVar, string(body))
				envVal = os.Getenv(envVar)
				changed = true
			}
		}
	}

	switch r.URL.Path {
	case "/":
		if isExistFile {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, envVal)
		} else if isExistEnv {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, envVal)
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Secret Not Found")
		}
	case "/readiness":
		if isExistEnv && isExistFile {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "OK")
		} else if isExistEnv && isExistFile == false && strings.HasPrefix(envVal, filePrefix) {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable was defined but file not found")
		} else if isExistEnv {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable was defined")
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable wasn't defined")
		}
	default:
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
		fmt.Fprintln(w, "404 Not Found")
	}
}
```

> In fact everything works and you can stop here. Unfortunately in the real world
> there are a lot of already working services and they must have implementation of
> additional environment variables. This isn't always possible and this approach
> can have specific limitations. In order to reduce the amount of limitations it's
> necessary to implement an approach based on support of both
> functions (variables) but without additional environment variables.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You could stop here and everything would work. However, in practice, it isn't
always possible to implement new environment variables in existing running
services. To reduce the amount of limitations it's necessary to implement an
approach based on support of both functions (variables) but without
additional environment variables.
```
Not clear to me though what "functions" means here.

This approach allows not to implement additional variable but to use the current
variable for two cases:

* legacy: using env variable for storing sensitive data
* new: using env variable for storing path to file with sensitive data and
override current value to value from the file

To distinguish sensitive data values from path to file, by using prefixes,
this will allow you to use the same variable and follow OWASP recommendations.

First let's define variables and constants:

*[cmd/main.go](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/blob/8c8177b4955ce9cd9686c2746e5e2a810b9c2f62/cmd/main.go#L12-L20)*
```go

> const (

Reviewer 4: So to clarify this section is about backwards compatibility with existing services, in a way? So instead of updating the existing envVar to a new variable, we're adding a filePrefix. Then the application checks whether the envVar  has a file path with `file://` and, if true, reads the file to get the sensitive data. If false (no `file://`), it interprets the filepath as a literal string and doesn't continue to fetch the actual Secret? 

Is that accurate?

Author: > So to clarify this section is about backwards compatibility with existing services, in a way? So instead of updating the existing envVar to a new variable, we're adding a filePrefix. Then the application checks whether the envVar has a file path with `file://` and, if true, reads the file to get the sensitive data. If false (no `file://`), it interprets the filepath as a literal string and doesn't continue to fetch the actual Secret?
> 
> Is that accurate?

Right. In this case `Literal string = Secret.`

```go
func httpHandle(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	if !changed {
		if envVal, isExistEnv = os.LookupEnv(envVar); isExistEnv {
			if filePath, isExistFile = fileExist(envVal); isExistFile {
				body, err := os.ReadFile(filePath)
				if err != nil {
					log.Fatalf("unable to read file: %v", err)
				}
				os.Setenv(envVar, string(body))
				envVal = os.Getenv(envVar)
				changed = true
			}
		}
	}
}
```

Finally, if define `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=file:///secrets/secret.file`, deploy
application and make request to `root` location, response will contain file
content which is defined in the environment variable:

```bash
curl -v localhost:8080
```

The output is similar to this:

```text
...
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:8080
> User-Agent: curl/8.5.0
> Accept: */*
>
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...
PVHBD5I21osTOX9i
```

Let's check process environment:

```bash
# strings /proc/1/environ
```

The output is similar to this:

```text
...
DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=file:///secrets/secret.file
...
```

Excellent! Environment variable still contains the value which was defined
during the deployment.

Let's check the secret file:

```bash
# cat /secrets/secret.file

#
```

> The file is empty! After redianess probe passed, the file was truncated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The file is empty! After readiness probe passed, the file was truncated.
```

If define `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=/secrets/secret.file` (without prefix) response
will contain the file name which was defined in the environment variable:

```bash
# curl -v localhost:8080
```

The output is similar to this:

```text
...
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:8080
> User-Agent: curl/8.5.0
> Accept: */*
>
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...
/secrets/secret.file
```

```bash
# strings /proc/1/environ
```

```text
...
DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD=/secrets/secret.file
...
```

```bash
# cat /secrets/secret.file
```

```text
cat: /secrets/secret.file: No such file or directory
```

`/secrets/secret.file` is a string interpreted as sensitive data, that's why
the file wasn't injected.

> At least attacker life has become more complicated because now in order to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The attacker's life has become more complicated because now in order to
```

## Next Stages

In the section I would like to share my reflections about next stages of
development of the described approach. Below there are a few breadcrumbs:

Firstly, it's necessary to consider the possibility of restricting applications
in the runtime container to precisely what's necessary for the app. This is the
best practice. That's why distroless images contain only application and its
runtime dependencies. They do not contain package managers, shells or any other
programs you would expect to find in an OS distribution.

Secondly, it's necessary to consider mechanisms of cleanup/removal of files by
TTL. Maybe it also makes sense to truncate runtime environment variables after
usage.

Thirdly, after smooth upgrading of all applications it's necessary to consider
the possibility of rejection of environment variables usage as sensitive data
passing way to container. Application must ignore any environment variables
except the ones whose values start with prefix

Fourthly, it's necessary to consider the possibility of using popular libraries,
which allow us to work effectively with environment variables, flags, configs,
etc. e.g this allows a faster

> [implementation of the described approach](https://github.com/efrikin/devsecops-in-action-kubernetes-secrets/tree/main/viper).

Reviewer 4: maybe use a numbered list?
